README.md, before:

# STIM - the Spatial Transcriptomics as Images Project

<img align="right" src="https://github.com/PreibischLab/STIM/blob/master/src/main/resources/Projection low-res-rgb.gif" alt="Example rendering of calm-2, ptgds, mbp" width="280">

The **S**patial **T**ranscriptomics as **Im**ages Project (STIM) is a framework for storing, (interactively) viewing, aligning, and processing spatial transcriptomics data, which builds on the powerful libraries [Imglib2](https://github.com/imglib/imglib2), [N5](https://github.com/saalfeldlab/n5), [BigDataViewer](https://github.com/bigdataviewer) and [Fiji](https://fiji.sc).

**STIM can be installed through [Conda](https://conda-forge.org) and uses [AnnData](https://anndata.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) and/or [N5](https://github.com/saalfeldlab/n5) as a storage backend thus allowing easy interaction with existing tools for spatial transcriptomics.** It provides efficient access to spatial transcriptomics data "classically" as values, or can render them as images at arbitrary resolution. These image representations allow to apply computer vision techniques to spatially resolved sequencing datasets.

Some highlights are: 
 * efficient interactive rendering (using [BigDataViewer](https://github.com/bigdataviewer))
 * rendering high-quality still images (using [ImageJ](https://imagej.nih.gov/ij/)/[Fiji](https://fiji.sc))
 * alignment of spatial dataset slides using [SIFT](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scale-invariant_feature_transform), [ICP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iterative_closest_point) and [RANSAC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Random_sample_consensus) combined with global optimization
 * efficient and fast storage using [AnnData](https://anndata.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) and [N5](https://github.com/saalfeldlab/n5) for multi-slice datasets
 * [Conda](https://conda-forge.org) installable, straight-forward interoperability with other packages
 * image filtering framework for irregularly-spaced datasets

A **great example** dataset is provided by the [SlideSeq paper](https://science.sciencemag.org/content/363/6434/1463.long) and can be downloaded [here](https://portals.broadinstitute.org/single_cell/study/slide-seq-study). 

A **minimal example** of a two-slice Visium dataset is available [here](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1qzzu4LmRukHBvbx_hiN2FOmIladiT7xx/view?usp=sharing).
**We provide a [detailed walk-through](https://github.com/preibischlab/stim/wiki/tutorials) for this dataset in the wiki to get you started.**
*Note: we highly recommend this tutorial as a starting point for using STIM. If you have any questions, feature requests or concerns please open an issue here on GitHub.*

**Please see the [wiki](https://github.com/PreibischLab/STIM/wiki) for additional tutorials, detailed installation instructions, and more.**

## Installation

We recommend using Conda to install STIM. If you don't have Conda installed, please follow the instructions [here](https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/install/). Once Conda is installed, you can install STIM from conda-forge by running:

```bash
conda install -c conda-forge stim
```

You can also build STIM from source, see the [detailed instructions](https://github.com/PreibischLab/STIM/wiki/Installation) in the wiki.


## Cite STIM

If you use STIM in your research, please cite our [publication](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.12.07.471629v1):

> Preibisch, S., Karaiskos, N., & Rajewsky, N. (2021). Image-based representation of massive spatial transcriptomics datasets. bioRxiv.


## Wrapping in Python

The [stimwrap package](https://github.com/rajewsky-lab/stimwrap) from the Rajewsky lab provides an interface to extract datasets and their attributes from an N5-container created by STIM.


## Java code examples

There are example classes in this [Java package](https://github.com/PreibischLab/STIM/tree/master/src/main/java/examples) that can help you getting started with programming in STIM, specifically `VisualizeStack.java` and `TestDisplayModes.java` could be useful.
Additionally, the code for all command-line tools can be found [here](https://github.com/PreibischLab/STIM/tree/master/src/main/java/cmd), which is also a good starting place in combination with the [tutorials](https://github.com/preibischlab/stim/wiki/tutorials).
*Note that the install scripts [install](https://github.com/PreibischLab/STIM/blob/master/install) and [install_windows.bat](https://github.com/PreibischLab/STIM/blob/master/install_windows.bat) show a link between the command-line tool name and Java class name, e.g., `st-bdv-view` is `cmd.DisplayStackedSlides`.*

Commit message:

Add stimwrap installation to readme

README.md, after:

# STIM - the Spatial Transcriptomics as Images Project

<img align="right" src="https://github.com/PreibischLab/STIM/blob/master/src/main/resources/Projection low-res-rgb.gif" alt="Example rendering of calm-2, ptgds, mbp" width="280">

The **S**patial **T**ranscriptomics as **Im**ages Project (STIM) is a framework for storing, (interactively) viewing, aligning, and processing spatial transcriptomics data, which builds on the powerful libraries [Imglib2](https://github.com/imglib/imglib2), [N5](https://github.com/saalfeldlab/n5), [BigDataViewer](https://github.com/bigdataviewer) and [Fiji](https://fiji.sc).

**STIM can be installed through [Conda](https://conda-forge.org) and uses [AnnData](https://anndata.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) and/or [N5](https://github.com/saalfeldlab/n5) as a storage backend thus allowing easy interaction with existing tools for spatial transcriptomics.** It provides efficient access to spatial transcriptomics data "classically" as values, or can render them as images at arbitrary resolution. These image representations allow to apply computer vision techniques to spatially resolved sequencing datasets.

Some highlights are: 
 * efficient interactive rendering (using [BigDataViewer](https://github.com/bigdataviewer))
 * rendering high-quality still images (using [ImageJ](https://imagej.nih.gov/ij/)/[Fiji](https://fiji.sc))
 * alignment of spatial dataset slides using [SIFT](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scale-invariant_feature_transform), [ICP](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iterative_closest_point) and [RANSAC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Random_sample_consensus) combined with global optimization
 * efficient and fast storage using [AnnData](https://anndata.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) and [N5](https://github.com/saalfeldlab/n5) for multi-slice datasets
 * [Conda](https://conda-forge.org) installable, straight-forward interoperability with other packages
 * image filtering framework for irregularly-spaced datasets

A **great example** dataset is provided by the [SlideSeq paper](https://science.sciencemag.org/content/363/6434/1463.long) and can be downloaded [here](https://portals.broadinstitute.org/single_cell/study/slide-seq-study). 

A **minimal example** of a two-slice Visium dataset is available [here](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1qzzu4LmRukHBvbx_hiN2FOmIladiT7xx/view?usp=sharing).
**We provide a [detailed walk-through](https://github.com/preibischlab/stim/wiki/tutorials) for this dataset in the wiki to get you started.**
*Note: we highly recommend this tutorial as a starting point for using STIM. If you have any questions, feature requests or concerns please open an issue here on GitHub.*

**Please see the [wiki](https://github.com/PreibischLab/STIM/wiki) for additional tutorials, detailed installation instructions, and more.**

## Installation

We recommend using Conda to install STIM. If you don't have Conda installed, please follow the instructions [here](https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/install/). Once Conda is installed, you can install STIM from conda-forge by running:

```bash
conda install -c conda-forge stim
```

You can also build STIM from source, see the [detailed instructions](https://github.com/PreibischLab/STIM/wiki/Installation) in the wiki.


## Cite STIM

If you use STIM in your research, please cite our [publication](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.12.07.471629v1):

> Preibisch, S., Karaiskos, N., & Rajewsky, N. (2021). Image-based representation of massive spatial transcriptomics datasets. bioRxiv.


## Wrapping in Python

The [stimwrap package](https://github.com/rajewsky-lab/stimwrap) from the Rajewsky lab provides an interface to extract datasets and their attributes from an N5-container created by STIM.
The package can be easily installed via pip:

```bash
pip install stimwrap
```


## Java code examples

There are example classes in this [Java package](https://github.com/PreibischLab/STIM/tree/master/src/main/java/examples) that can help you getting started with programming in STIM, specifically `VisualizeStack.java` and `TestDisplayModes.java` could be useful.
Additionally, the code for all command-line tools can be found [here](https://github.com/PreibischLab/STIM/tree/master/src/main/java/cmd), which is also a good starting place in combination with the [tutorials](https://github.com/preibischlab/stim/wiki/tutorials).
*Note that the install scripts [install](https://github.com/PreibischLab/STIM/blob/master/install) and [install_windows.bat](https://github.com/PreibischLab/STIM/blob/master/install_windows.bat) show a link between the command-line tool name and Java class name, e.g., `st-bdv-view` is `cmd.DisplayStackedSlides`.*
